.TH ARCHCANARY 1 "2026-06-23" "archcanary @VERSION@" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
archcanary \- security scanner for Arch Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B archcanary
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B archcanary
is a layered security detection stack for Arch Linux.
It integrates and orchestrates existing security tools \(em
.BR lynis ,
.BR bpftool ,
.BR traur ,
.BR aurscan ,
and others \(em into a single unified scanner, while also performing
its own checks for malicious AUR packages, systemd and eBPF persistence,
npm/bun/yarn/pnpm cache poisoning, PKGBUILD obfuscation, kernel module
tampering, library injection, and more.
.PP
By default (no flags) it checks currently installed foreign packages
against the known-bad list and scans
.I /var/log/pacman.log
for historical installs.
All checks are read-only; nothing is removed or quarantined.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Scan checks
.TP
.B \-\-check-systemd
Scan for unknown systemd services with
.IR "Restart=always" .
.TP
.B \-\-check-ebpf
Check for eBPF rootkit traces under
.IR /sys/fs/bpf/hidden_* .
.TP
.B \-\-check-npm-cache
Check the npm cache for package names in
.IR malicious_npm_packages.txt .
.TP
.B \-\-check-bun-cache
Check the bun cache for packages in
.IR malicious_npm_packages.txt .
.TP
.B \-\-check-yarn-cache
Scan yarn v1 and Berry caches, including fnm per-version globals.
.TP
.B \-\-check-pnpm-cache
Scan the pnpm store, global installs, metadata cache, and dlx cache.
.TP
.B \-\-check-pkgbuild
Scan AUR helper caches for obfuscation patterns in PKGBUILD and
.I .install
files (base64 decode-to-shell, eval subshell, printf hex/octal,
variable-split command reassembly).
.TP
.B \-\-check-bpftool
Enumerate loaded eBPF programs, perf/kprobe attachments with owning PID
and hooked function, and XDP/TC network attachments.
Requires root.
.TP
.B \-\-check-ldso
Check
.I /etc/ld.so.preload
for shared library injection and recent
.I /etc/ld.so.conf.d/
changes.
.TP
.B \-\-check-autostart
Scan XDG autostart entries, user systemd services, and shell RC files
for download-and-exec patterns.
.TP
.B \-\-check-kmod
Audit loaded kernel modules against pacman-tracked files; flag
untracked DKMS builds not in the allowlist.
Requires root.
.TP
.B \-\-check-lynis
Parse the last Lynis hardening report at
.IR /var/log/lynis-report.dat .
Requires root.
.TP
.B \-\-run-lynis
Run
.B "lynis audit system"
and stream the output.
Requires root.
.TP
.B \-\-check-pkginteg
Verify installed file checksums against the pacman database using
.BR "pacman \-Qkk" .
Reports SHA256 mismatches on files that are not pacman-managed backup files
and not under
.IR /factory/ .
Backup files (config files pacman marks as user-editable) diverge by design
and are excluded.
Prioritise any hits in
.IR /usr/bin/ ,
.IR /usr/lib/ ,
and
.IR /usr/sbin/ .
Running as root gives complete coverage; as a regular user
.BR pacman
silently skips files it cannot read.
Requires root.
.TP
.B \-\-full
Enable all of the above checks.
.SS List management
.TP
.B \-\-refresh
Download the latest package list from the Arch Linux HedgeDoc before scanning.
.TP
\fB\-\-package-list\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Override the infected AUR package list (default:
.IR ~/.config/archcanary/package_list.txt ).
.TP
\fB\-\-malicious-npm-list\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Override the malicious npm package name list (default:
.IR ~/.config/archcanary/malicious_npm_packages.txt ).
.TP
\fB\-\-chaos-rat-list\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Override the CHAOS RAT campaign package list.
.TP
\fB\-\-russian-spam-list\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Override the Russian Spam Campaign package list.
.TP
\fB\-\-extra-list\fR=\fIPATH_OR_URL\fR
Load an additional package list from a file path or
.B https://
URL.
Repeatable.
.SS Output control
.TP
.BR \-\-verbose ", " \-v
Verbose output.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Verbose; enables
.BR set\ -x .
.TP
\fB\-\-log-file\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Write full detail log to
.IR PATH .
If
.I PATH
is
.BR auto ,
the log is written to
.IR "~/.cache/archcanary/aur-check-<date>.log" .
.TP
.B \-\-no-notify
Suppress the desktop notification on detection.
.TP
.B \-\-no-summary
Suppress the check summary table at the end of a scan.
.TP
\fB\-\-color\fR=\fIauto\fR|\fIalways\fR|\fInever\fR
Control color and Unicode symbol output (default:
.BR auto ).
.B auto
enables color only when stdout is a terminal.
.SS Health check
.TP
.B \-\-doctor
Report the install and configuration status of every stack element
(binary dependencies, systemd units, aurscan, traur, yay/paru hooks) and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-doctor\fR=\fISECTION\fR[,\fISECTION\fR...]
Check only the named section(s) with extra per-item detail.
Sections:
.BR platform ", " deps ", " user ", " system ", " systemd ", " external .
Tool names
.RB ( aurscan ", " traur ", " yad \&...)
are also accepted.
.TP
.B \-\-version ", " \-V
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help ", " \-h
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean — no indicators found.
.TP
.B 1
Warnings — potential issues or skipped root checks.
.TP
.B 2
Infected — malicious packages or artifacts detected.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set, disables all color and Unicode symbols (equivalent to
.BR \-\-color=never ).
.TP
.B PACMAN_LOG_GLOB
Override the glob used to find pacman log files.
Default:
.IR /var/log/pacman.log* .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/archcanary/package_list.txt
Known-bad AUR package list (infostealer + eBPF rootkit campaign).
.TP
.I ~/.config/archcanary/malicious_npm_packages.txt
Malicious npm package name list.
.TP
.I /var/lib/archcanary/last-scan.log
Last system scan result.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/archcanary/last-user-scan.log
Last user scan result.
.TP
.I /etc/archcanary/dkms_allowlist.conf
System-wide DKMS module allowlist for
.BR \-\-check-kmod .
.TP
.I /var/log/lynis-report.dat
Lynis report file read by
.BR \-\-check-lynis .
.TP
.I /usr/lib/archcanary/
System library directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR traur (1),
.BR yay (8),
.BR pacman (8),
.BR auditd (8),
.BR bpftool (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR lynis (8)
.SH AUTHORS
musqz
.UR https://github.com/musqz/archcanary
.UE
